---
layout: post
title: What Does Steve Bannon Think?
date:   2020-08-21
summary: Steve Bannon propelled Trump to victory in 2016, then fell from grace.
    He is a deeply controversial figure, and his importance in modern politics is understated.
---

### Introduction

Steve Bannon appeared on our collective radars four years ago in August 2016, as the chief
strategist of Trump's campaign. After Trump won, baffled voters on the left
looked to Bannon as the explanation, the _eminence grise_, the man behind the curtain.
Bannon
was mysterious, said some fascist-sounding things, and looked unhealthy like a Hollywood villain.
It was easy to box him in as Darth Sidious.


Bannon lasted twelve months with Trump. He was fired in August 2017 after he
pushed the "fine people on both sides" line for addressing [Charlottesville](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unite_the_Right_rally).
He then disappeared from media coverage, as swiftly as he emerged.
I had forgotten about him until
I heard a quick line in [an interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RmsN4_hftvI):


> Millennials, they're like 19th century Russian serfs. They're in better shape,
> they have more information, they're better dressed, but they don't own anything.
> Millennials don't have a chance.


That was very true. Bannon's comments about millennials being a generation of
permanent renters, whose economic situation resembled feudalism[^1] more than anything else,
struck me as succinct, correct, and hardly expressed by anyone else.

From there, I was curious: surely there's more to Bannon than the one-dimensional
media caricature, especially due to his significant impact on the success
of Trump's election. So, I asked: **what does Steve Bannon really think?**
I present my findings, as well as my reflections, below.
My view is that Bannon's publicly advertised positions make significant sense
and are worth discussing, but Bannon himself is a suave trickster: some of his
purported views are certainly not genuine.

### Views

- Bannon describes himself as an **economic nationalist**. He believes that
    the value of *citizenship* has suffered greatly in the past decades.
    In the US,[^9]
    the government has allowed its obligations to its citizens to fall behind
    its obligations toward corporations. Instead of maximizing citizen quality
    of life, we are maximizing shareholder value.
    The lower-middle and working classes have lost the value of their citizenship;
    Bannon seeks to restore it.[^3]


- On the flip-side, Bannon believes that the world is effectively run by a
    **permanent political class**: elites who never lose, and who
    have dispassionately managed the decline of the US, using
    globalization to accrue more wealth and power to themselves.


- Bannon sees the **2008 financial crisis** as a key coup for these elites:
    the banks were bailed out, not a single banker was punished,
    and the losses were socialized. That's not capitalism. Following 2008,
    under Obama, the Fed's balance sheet expanded from $1T to $4.5T.
    That quantitative easing (read: inflation) debased the value of the USD.
    The little guy -- folks who hold, and depend on cash -- paid for it.
    On the other hand,
    for people that hold real estate, IP, or equities,
    the last ten years have been the greatest run in history.


- Bannon describes this state as **neofeudalism**: people who don't own
    assets are effectively serfs. Millennials especially are
    permanent renters. They do not own anything, and the system is so efficient
    that they will never own anything. The resulting economic fragility is terrible:
    people aren't having children, can't cover emergencies, and so on.


- Bannon views both Democrats and Republicans to blame. First for 2008,
    second for continuous **wage suppression**. To Bannon, both parties seek
    to let their corporate donors extract maximum profits -- for Democrats,
    that's by (legal or illegal) immigration[^4] that floods the
    labor supply, for Republicans that's by free trade deals, which
    encourage outsourcing by
    having American labor compete in price with foreign labor.


- Bannon views the **Republican party** as playing to its donors, and
    opposed to their voter interests.
    In the last 20 years, the Republicans have sold their voters a Koch-brothers,
    Heritage-foundation, limited-government, free-trade vision.
    It has wrecked their education and healthcare systems, and sent all the jobs
    overseas. The effects have been ruinous.
    The Republican primary candidates of 2015/2016 were the strongest
    lineup of all time; any one of them would have won most presidential
    elections. But Trump could beat them all, because voters
    aren't falling for the traditional Republican scam and policy mumbo-jumbo anymore.


- In Bannon's view, in 2016, voters cared about **basic sovereignty**.
    Immigration, trade, employment, _where's my paycheck_.
    Voters care about [locker room talk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Trump_Access_Hollywood_tape),
    but that's easily outweighed when bigger things are at stake.
    In 2016, a record number of people thought the country was on the wrong track.[^2]
    Voters want their sovereignty, their value as citizens back.


- To Bannon, core to this loss of sovereignty for everyday citizens are **three items**:
    (1) the recession and subsequent inflation,
    (2) pointless, expensive wars in Iraq and Afghanistan,
    and (3) outsourcing of American manufacturing to China.


- Bannon views **China** as a totalitarian, mercantilist, murderous dictatorship.[^5]
    He believes that the CCP poses the greatest threat to all freedom-loving people
    and industrial democracies, like Nazi Germany in the 1930s, a profound threat
    to the Westphalian order and Western democracy. Westerners are not taking the
    concentration camps in Xinjiang and annexation of Hong Kong as seriously as they should.


- In turn, Bannon views the shareholder-value-maximization-induced outsourcing
    of **US manufacturing** to China as a gargantuan mistake, inextricably causing to America's decline.
    It has decimated
    employment in rural America, and lost American _key competence_
    in essential industries. Bannon believes that the CCP has been running
    economic war on the US,[^6] and Americans haven't realized it because of our Wall Street
    interests in China. We've gained a little more short-term economic efficiency,
    but lost
    the sovereignty and welfare of our working class -- the backbone of US society -- and enabled China
    to lock down and own advanced manufacturing in perpetuity. A disaster.


- With respect to Bannon's core issues, he views Trump as an "**imperfect, but armor-piercing shell**": under Trump,
    the loss of American manufacturing, and foreign/trade policy with China,
    have gone from being marginal issues to front-and-center.


- **Trump** won because of his basic appeal to the sovereignty of his voters;
    addressing immigration and outsourcing to China as the key issues. He had planned
    to run on those issues for over a decade.[^7] He knew
    how to connect with working-class voters, how to rally them, and how to be accessible --
    getting rid of the political nomenclature and policy jargon.


- Bannon points out that politics has transitioned from the field of traditional politicians
    to the field of those who truly understand media. **Mass communications** is
    overwhelming and omnipresent. Trump is a master of communications, he knows how to drive the media,
    to force the media to play on his field. The media is always *reacting*, overwhelmed
    by his incessant scandal-generation. Bannon called the strategy "flooding the zone with shit,"
    and it's undeniably effective.


- Finally, in this era of mass media, the country is all about politics. 118 million people voted in the 2018 midterms.
    Bannon's view is that in terms of turnout, **democracy** has never been more engaged and robust.
    This view is obviously facile: the early 1900s had similar levels of political engagement,
    until the polarization boiled over and you had armed coups. Angry discourse is manageable
    until interests have diverged so far that they're irreconcilable, at which point
    the guns come out. It doesn't take much to figure out that polarization is harmful.



### Commentary

Most of these views were expressed between 2018 and 2020.
Taken at face value, they seem reasonable.
Bannon's articulation of why Trump won is clearer than any pundit's or leftist's,
and he raises
a serious question about priorities: **are we on the left wasting our time
arguing about pronouns when our children will get shipped to concentration camps in Xinjiang?**
Are we dumb for sweating the small stuff and the optics, while not paying attention to the
big issues that, on net, might be a million times more impactful?
Bannon's mission is clear: the CCP is the great threat to Western democracy and way of life;
boycott it at all costs, bring back American technological expertise
in manufacturing, and in the process restore the welfare of the working/lower-middle classes.


But what's suspicious about Bannon's "economic nationalism" is that while he's all about
economic _problems_, he has little to say about economic _solutions_.
While he aggressively
blames the elites for 2008 and for shipping jobs to China, he doesn't have anything
to say for solving neofeudalism.
Obviously bringing back jobs will help a little,
but it's neither a full solution, nor does it address the core problem.
Neofeudalism comes out of highly efficient, industrialized
wealth inequality, which occurs because the rate of return on capital is
greater than the rate of return on labor. This was the big problem that Piketty
[pointed out](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_in_the_Twenty-First_Century) in 2013.
While Bannon points out the same problem, and says that it's important to restore
asset ownership to the working/middle classes, he doesn't offer any solutions for _how_.
Shouldn't an economic nationalist have cogent economic solutions to propose?


There's [good journalism](https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/the-narcissism-and-ego-that-led-to-steve-bannons-arrest)
from people who have tracked Bannon more closely than I, who claim that Bannon's
"economic nationalism" angle is new. Immigration has been his core issue
forever. It's central to his economic nationalism, which raises a crucial question:
is Bannon's economic nationalism just a vehicle for advancing his hostile views
on China and immigration, which he has made the #1 and #2 priorities in his
agenda?
While there's no debate that Bannon is a nationalist, it's suspect
how sincere the _economic_ part of his economic nationalism is.
If it is sincere, then there's a real question as to how well thought-through it really is,
since an overwhelming number of economists across the political spectrum view
immigration as a net economic benefit.


Indeed, there's something unsettling and sly about Bannon's purported economic nationalism:
he _insists_ that he's not an ethnic nationalist, but somehow he always ends up
very closely aligned with them. Debaters [point this out](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8AtOw-xyMo8),
but Bannon is a slippery debater: "everyone keeps calling me a fascist,
but fascists, by definition, want bigger states! I want to deconstruct the administrative state."[^8]
Bannon plays excellent definitions-games -- he is able to easily
refute the accusation by definition, and in turn totally evade the _connotation_ that
his counterparties mean.

Bannon also always has well-prepared counterexamples
to his opponents' predictable attacks, but he never refutes them
on an abstract level.
For example, when confronted about Breitbart's hateful, misleading content, he skillfully outmaneuvers
his leftist interrogator by describing how Breitbart was made to subvert the
Republican establishment.
His defense of the "fine people on both sides" comment is an especially powerful example of his argumentative contortions.
Bannon's refutations regarding allegations of his ethnic nativism leave me
with the feeling of when someone is playing games,
moving the goalposts and feeding you bullshit, but you don't have the time in the venue
to pick them apart.


Bannon's insincerity is clear in his [Frontline](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pm5xxlajTW0)
[interviews](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gDqAnOyAgt4) with PBS:
he plays to the intellectual audience with the most
centrist-populist version of his beliefs, but he's hoodwinking the viewer:
he fawns over Trump, both personally and politically.
But we know that Bannon had been _fired_ from the White House,
and had then publicly disparaged Trump, and his family, in [Michael Wolff's Fire and Fury](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Bannon#Quotes_in_Michael_Wolff_books).
In the interview, Bannon is plainly lying in attempt to preserve whatever relationship with Trump.


Indeed, no matter how candid Bannon seems, his integrity is weak.
[Allegations](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/senate-intelligence-committee-donald-trump-jr-jared-kushner-stephen-bannon-erik-prince/2020/08/15/a7905a84-def5-11ea-b205-ff838e15a9a6_story.html)
have emerged that Bannon lied to congressional investors during Mueller's Investigation.
More shockingly -- and in brazen irony -- he's now even been arrested for embezzling money
from his "We Build the Wall" non-profit fundraising campaign. Convincing Americans
they need to build a border wall, privately raising money for it, then defrauding
them of those funds, takes unbelievable chutzpah.


The conclusion that I'm led to is that Bannon is a special type of grifter:
sly, insincere, and self-serving.
What kind of _nationalist_ lies to congressional investigators?
He's a deeply skilled political operative. Who knows what his true personal goals are;
but I suspect the "economic nationalist" agenda he laid out above is not the whole story.


That said, the economic nationalist agenda Bannon advocates is coherent,
and many points seem reasonable, certainly worthy of serious discussion.
Perhaps the issue with Bannon is the same as with Trump -- they find a valid platform
to run on, something that deeply resonates with the masses, and where there is
genuine need for great change -- but they wrap that in their own buffoonery and grift.
It turns out that even when running on a righteous cause,
all the habits formed over the decades, the little cons and lies,
they stick. No man can escape himself.


<br/>

----

[^1]: Millennials' economic situation is feudalistic since
    millennials do not _own_ the underlying goods they are adding value to. Just
    like how the agrarian serfs were allowed to subsist on their lord's farm land,
    the lord always captured more value. Similarly, millennials do not have any
    equity in the enterprises they contribute to, and their cash compensation
    is usually a small minority of the economic value they create for their employers.
    Like the agrarian serfs of old, millennials are locked into a life of subsistence.

[^2]:
    While Bannon repeatedly sticks to the "right track, wrong track" anecdote
    as one of the key reasons for Trump winning, I couldn't actually find
    polling that substantiated his "record high" claims. It seems like voter outlook
    in 2016 was similar to that of 2008 and 1992.

[^3]:
    Possibly to thwart accusations of racism or *ethnic* nationalism as opposed
    to economic nationalism, Bannon will often remark that those lower-middle
    and working class populations are, to a significant extent, Hispanic
    and African-American.

[^4]:
    In passing, Bannon also accuses Republicans of covertly encouraging
    *illegal* immigration as cheap labor.

[^5]:
    Bannon clarifies that he views the Chinese people as fine like any other,
    and the ruling CCP cadre as a great evil.

[^6]:
    See currency manipulation, stockpiling PPE while telling the rest of the world
    that COVID-19 is no big deal, etc.

[^7]:
    His presidential ambitions became clear around 2010, when he started
    writing cheques to major conservative leaders, and he published [Time
    to Get Tough](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_to_Get_Tough), a policy book.

[^8]:
    In none of the interviews that I watched could I get a read on what exactly
    Bannon understands to be the administrative state, or the precise issues with it.
    Bannon paints with a broad brush.

[^9]: Bannon thinks that this issue is not just specific to the US, but across the board:
    in most western nations, the value of citizenship has suffered.
