---
layout: post
title: Ten Reasons for Tech Optimism in 2021
date:   2020-11-26
summary: We are approaching an inflection point of technological change and ambition.
    COVID has forced technological acceleration in key areas, and saved us years of malaise.
published: true
---


I have written [previously](/2020/10/24/future.html)
about losing my teenage optimism for technology,
and how we struggle to have bold dreams for the future.
Many people have articulated theses of this type, most famously
Peter Thiel in claiming that we've seen great innovation in the world of bits,
but not of atoms. However, change is in the air. I believe we are approaching an inflection point
of technological change and ambition.
In a twist of irony, COVID has done a great deal to push this along.


Before 2020, we were stuck in what I call the _eternal 90s_.
With the Soviet Union defeated, the United States had no focal
objective: no great enemy to defeat, no great frontier to explore.
For almost thirty years, the same set of Bill Clinton-era trends compounded on
themselves: liberalization, globalization, and growth of the internet.
It's been a good thirty years of steady marginal progress:
reliable growth in GDP, better medicine, higher quality of food, and so on, like clockwork.
Unfortunately, marginal change is not _inspirational_.
It has been a long time since technology has captured the hearts and minds of
a generation like the space race did in the 1960s.


Enter 2020. Between COVID and Trump,
the trends of the eternal 90s have ruptured somewhat.
Technological penetration has leapt forward by years.
The year 2021, and the thoughts prevalent in it, will be different from 2019,
much more so than for almost any other one-year gap in recent history.
There are several important components in this shift:


**1. Cheap Capital**

In response to COVID, the American fiscal response has been aggressive.
With around [6 trillion dollars](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/04/15/coronavirus-economy-6-trillion/)
of stimulus, capital is cheap and will be for a long time.
This is subtle, but of dominant importance.


**2. The Best Ever Funding Environment**

With trillions of stimulus dollars in the markets, the zero-interest-rate
search for yield of the late 2010s is more desperate than ever before.
There are more dollars in venture than there are ideas.
If there has ever been a time in which it is feasible to raise gargantuan
rounds to pursue real-world moonshots, this is it.


**3. The Great Unbundling**

Many institutions exist
as a consequence of returns to scale.
While technology has slowly eroded some of their necessity,
this has greatly accelerated under COVID.
These institutions
are now clearly struggling to deliver value, and self-sufficiency is becoming a priority again.
We are on the cusp of many traditional structures and institutions
being totally overhauled and unbundled. This is an enormously exciting opportunity
across many industries.


**4. De-Urbanization**

Cities were Schelling points for talent in 2019,
but no longer.
COVID has catapulted remote work tools and culture forward by years.
Previously urban professionals are
moving to smaller cities and suburbs,
and owning homes years ahead of schedule.
This has wide-ranging impacts: a class of workers is suddenly
much more financially secure, tier-2/3 cities see an influx of high-earning
professionals, tier-1 cities become cheaper,
and as geography wanes in importance, opportunity becomes more accessible to all,
even on a global scale.


**5. Schooling**

Schooling is being rapidly unbundled at all levels.
Like de-urbanization, homeschooling was previously a small, niche trend.
Under COVID, it is a necessity.
As with remote work, the demand, culture, and tools for it have advanced by years
in a few months.

The same has occurred for higher education. Many have written about the
out-of-control costs of college, while struggling to replace the extremely
convenient all-in-one package of academics, socializing, and professional training
that college provides. But COVID has forced the unbundling of college: now that students get to meet
none of their classmates in person and are paying $60k a year for online
lectures that they could get for free off YouTube, the simple BA credential
obviously isn't worth it for most. As education gets unbundled, it will become radically cheaper and open,
multiplying opportunity on a global scale.


**6. Digital Gold and More**

The fiscal response to COVID was explicitly inflationary.
The Fed has nearly doubled the assets on its balance sheet
to prop up the markets,
and the US dollar has depreciated against other currencies.
Prudent investors are worried about potential runaway inflation,
and attention turns to Bitcoin again.
Now much more mature and validated,
it is appealing as an inflation hedge.
As its ecosystem matures more, we may see
many products on top of the base layer.
In the next decade, we might not just see programmable money, but
a groundbreaking separation of state and money. The opportunities for
(tumultuous) change and innovation in this context are endless.


**7. Independent Workers**

With remote work, workers become more independent.
Superstars -- who bring outsize value, many times their compensation --
are realizing they can go independent with their brand. You see it in
[investing, writing, even porn](/2020/08/16/spac.html). The newspapers and TV
of tomorrow will look very different from those of today.
This trend will be universal across media.


**8. New Dreams: SpaceX and Tesla**

Tesla has had a dizzying ten-fold
run in the markets this year, surpassing a $500B market cap.
By valuation, the markets
think that TSLA will not obsolete _some_ incumbent car companies, but _all_
of them.
I believe that part of why $TSLA has appreciated so greatly
is that in this time of desperation,
Elon Musk delivers a vision people can believe in.
People are watching
rocket launches again, and this time they're reusable rockets out of Musk's
private enterprise.
He is innovating in the world of atoms, not of bits,
and that's relatable and inspiring in a way that no software entrepreneur
before him ever was.
Tesla is barely even working on truly self-driving cars, and somehow Musk
has sold a _vision_ of autonomous vehicles that Waymo hasn't.
People are dreaming of going to space again. Musk is inspiring a generation
of budding entrepreneurs to build things that are grand and ambitious.


**9. New Worlds: AR/VR**

AR and VR technologies had their moment of hype in the mid-2010s, but
didn't catch on in the mainstream.
However, a little like Bitcoin, the technology and infrastructure
has been steadily improving in the background. It's becoming very good,
and soon it'll be ready for primetime.
Video games and movies are going to get hit by the colossal force
of a new, more immersive medium with enormous room for experimentation.
Even mundane things like exercise and videocalls will get turned on their heads.
This will be the biggest leap in the *medium* of computing since the smartphone
in 2007.



**10. Digital Health**

Six years ago, only medical patients had real-time feeds of their vital signs.
Thanks to Apple Watches, tens of millions of consumers now have a
continuous ECG and blood oxygen monitor.
Thousands of hobbyists wear glucose monitors.
Innovations in chips (M1) and wireless (5G)
dramatically improve the computing and streaming capacity for detailed vital sign data,
and the benefits will compound.
Over the decade, I expect us to get fitness-grade health data streams for most major vital signs,
and that analysis of this data at scale will enable early detection
of both common and grave medical conditions like heart attacks.


**Conclusion**

So, what's happening? Well, capital is cheaper than ever. It's an amazing time
to be an entrepreneur with bold, ambitious ideas. The success of Elon Musk
is inspiring a generation to be exactly that. And where are these entrepreneurs to start?
Well, digital health and AR/VR are ripening to change people's lives massively at scale.
We might see the separation between state and money. And if that's not enough,
most of our traditional institutions and structures, like cities, schools, and
employment are getting unbundled as we speak, democratizing access to opportunity.
Roll up your sleeves,
pick whatever target you want, it's a good time to build.


<br/>

---


**Addendum: Empty Spaces**

While this doesn't fit strictly into the realm of technological innovation,
there's work to be done reimagining the city, too.
Under COVID, cities have lost not just residents, but also businesses.
With retail having jumped online, and many restaurants now operating
as delivery-only cloud kitchens, there's a big question as to what happens
with vacant prime real estate.
Are bars and clothing shops really the best we can do?
The destruction that has happened here has created an opening for experimentation
and new establishments that offer novel in-person experiences.
