---
layout: post
title: For the Future of Work, Look to Gaming
date:   2020-09-06
summary: "Virtually every \"Future of Work\" software product has a predecessor in consumer social,
    but particularly in online gaming."
---

In 2002, my mom started a new job in finance.
One day, I visited her office.
As part of the grand tour, she showed me her
Lotus Notes setup on her PC, and explained that she received around 400 emails a day.
This *baffled* my eleven year old mind: "why don't you guys just use MSN?" My
friends at school used Microsoft's Messenger for everything. Some of my friends
in the US had me hopping on AOL, but either one seemed obviously better than
my mom and her highly-paid colleagues shooting one-line emails through their bulky setups.
Nearly twenty years later, Slack and Microsoft Teams are finally making real-time chat
commonplace even among the most traditional enterprises.


In the early 2000s, I was deep in MMO gaming (specifically [RuneScape](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RuneScape)).
I joined and led clans of hundreds of other players,
sometimes in PVP, but most often just to make money.
For us kids, these were remarkably successful group efforts:
large groups of teenage strangers around the world organized themselves, mostly over text chat, to work together
for hours every day.
I still know my major timezone overlaps off by heart from back then.
We used [phpBB forums](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PhpBB)
for longer-form discussion and official matters, and set up
internal Wikis for knowledge management.
We used IRC to chat in real-time,
and set up dozens of custom scripts to integrate with external services.
If we
needed audio to chat in real-time,
we'd use [Ventrilo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ventrilo),
which would support
up to 400 people simultaneously.
For sharing short screen recordings, we used
[Gyazo](https://gyazo.com/) and [Puush](https://puush.me/), a decade before [Loom](https://www.loom.com/) was founded.


As such, the past few months of COVID quarantine have been a real throwback for me.
As a teen, I sat at my desk for fourteen hours a day, coordinating buyouts of ingame items,
playing on one screen, watching IRC and forums on the other, while chatting over Ventrilo.[^4]
Now, as an adult, I am doing the same, just with real work, Slack, and Zoom instead.[^1]


The rest of the world has been adjusting to this new normal, and venture/tech Twitter
(mostly people who were *not* obsessive online-gaming teens in the early 2000s)
has been abuzz with theories about what collaboration in this new world looks like.
To me, it looks a great deal like the toolset I used to very competitively[^2] play online games.
Some tools, like Notion, GitHub, and Roam Research are genuinely unprecedented
in that they have no prior product analogies, but for the most part, you can
predict the 2020 remote work toolkit by looking
at the 2010 gaming toolkit.

It's unsurprising that there would be a strong correspondence between online
gaming and work tools. Both are collaborative team efforts, and require low-latency communication
over text, audio, and video. Both make use of complex external services to manage
recruiting, onboarding, collective knowledge, and to solve complicated
coordination problems over multiple timezones for dozens, if not hundreds of teammates.

Let's look ahead. What does gaming in 2020 tell us
about collaborative work in the future?


### Twitch


[Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/) is a livestreaming/social platform, most popular for video games.
Streamers on Twitch have slowly expanded to now include real-life vlogging,
teaching, live coding, painting, writing, and other non-gaming genres.
What's most interesting is that streamers are starting to use Twitch to share their
*creative efforts* as they build: some people are now even [building businesses](https://24hrstartup.com/),
all in public, on Twitch.


I believe this style of content production and engagement is
going to shift *how work is done* in a few years.
Most employees will be streaming as they work, and their colleagues
may drop in on their streams with ideas and suggestions.
It'll feel weirdly invasive
at first.
There's certainly a hump to get over when
live-streaming your thoughts and showing your intimate, unfinished work-product drafts.
However, once people get used to it, it's collaboration supercharged.
You'll work, take a break, peruse your coworkers' streams, find something interesting, drop in,
chat for five minutes, share context, and get back to your own stuff.
The feedback loop of creation becomes much tighter.


### Video as Institutional Knowledge


Closely related to Twitch is YouTube -- after you've done a stream, you'll upload a copy for posterity.
This solves a problem in how companies deal with the loss of institutional knowledge
-- namely, *how to do stuff* -- as they grow. As people leave, so do all the little procedures
and processes that glue together a large operational organization. All companies try to remedy this
through written knowledge bases, and the vast majority fail. Screen recordings
of *how employees work* can be powerful stores of institutional knowledge.[^5]



### Audio Preferred


Face-to-face communications for routine meetings are going away.
I'm in a lot of Zoom meetings these days, and
I don't want to stare at another person's face,
and try to read their expressions.
It wears me out.
I don't want to carefully adjust
my background to look presentable.
Most people I know who are on 3+ calls a day
will subtly push toward audio-only.
New users may start off excited about video meetings and seeing other people's faces,
but as they become power users, video becomes too taxing and they move toward audio only.
Outside of important/first-time external meetings,
power users and well-acquainted teammates don't want all the baggage
of video calls, they want [TeamSpeak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TeamSpeak).


### Splinter Groups


As far as meetings go, the current big open problem is that it is extremely difficult
to replicate the experience of meeting as a group, splintering into smaller conversations,
and hopping from conversation to conversation, the way you might at a professional event
(or a party in Silicon Valley; the two are identical).
Ventrilo solved this problem
over a decade ago:[^3] create ephemeral channels/groups within your VoIP server
that people can join, and that close when they have no members. Supporting this
is the next big step for Zoom.
If they fall short, they very seriously open up
the market for any other entrant that can facilitate this.


### AR/VR


For all the talk about shifting paradigms under remote work, there's been little talk
of AR/VR collaborative solutions. There are tons of vendors! But they're all uncanny-valley
experiences that very imperfectly try to replicate the experience of face-to-face meetings,
or (even worse) conferences. All of these collaborate-in-VR solutions feel awkwardly skeuomorphic,
and I expect that nothing will come of them.


Why? Because, just like in the above point, face-to-face comms are an *artifact*, not a *goal*.
The goals are always to exchange information, build trust, and to make decisions.
Strapping into an Oculus Rift to sit in a virtual meeting room with a bunch of
Lara Croft lookalikes doesn't advance the goal, it only distracts. Even a perfect VR
experience would only distract.


Going out on a limb, I expect that if users do end up going for 3D interaction,
it's going to look a lot more like a blend of traditional MMORPGs and [Mozilla Hubs](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/get-started-hubs-mozilla)
than anything requiring an AR or VR device.


### Discord


If Discord starts marketing itself for a more professional crowd, it will
destroy Slack. It's a far superior software product -- lighter-weight, faster,
and it natively supports audio and video chat inside the platform.
Discord is a $10B+ company in the making. Perhaps controversially, I think
if users adapt to audio being more important than video, Discord is a serious competitor to Zoom.


### Lighter-Weight Applications


All good gaming-adjacent software is light and fast.
Bulky software would slow down your computer and you'd lose in games!
Similarly, we're enduring an epidemic of slow enterprise software.
Asana, JIRA, Confluence, Slack, Google Drive,
and so forth: using any of these tools is like wading through molasses.
There's lag when you enter keystrokes, interfaces load slowly due to hundreds of API calls
under the hood, and so on.

I desperately hope that as SaaS providers try harder to provide mind-melding interfaces
between man and machine, they'll eventually realize that a lack of speed
is the biggest barrier between the two; that the speed of response and navigation
is the single most important feature to a serious user.


### Conclusion


Right now, we are in a strange period of adjustment as people learn to work remotely.
Users cling to representations of real life, meetings, and face-to-face Zooms.
But this is an inconvenience, and it'll become more rare for routine work.
Audio is king in the remote world work; video -- of actual humans -- is less relevant,
simulacrum of a past paradigm.
On the other hand, video of _work_ is of paramount importance, and the combination
of live streaming and video storage will reshape how employees work, collaborate,
and share institutional knowledge.


In this world, AR and VR are somewhat counter-intuitive losers, only useful
in very niche applications. If people collaborate in some kinds of 3D spaces,
it'll be mostly for rapid prototyping, sketching, etc.
It is clear
that collaborative, multi-user, version-controlled/historied software will succeed
in this paradigm; I expect more products like Figma and Google Docs to arrive, and
single-user software like PhotoShop to quietly leave the scene. And I pray that
this new, glorious software will be fast.



<br/>

---

[^1]: The familiarity of this sensation was pleasant until it started [driving me crazy](/2020/08/21/incel.html).

[^2]:
    You might laugh at the notion of a competitive RuneScape player, but it ended up paying my way through college.
    A story for another time.

[^3]: [Mumble](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mumble_(software)) solved it in a different way: for online 3D spaces,
    like in FPS games, not only can you break up into channels, etc. but the loudness of your voice, as heard by another player,
    is proportionate to your distance from them. Insofar as supporting the skeuomorphic VR experience goes,
    this might be a clean way to make it feel more organic.

[^4]: The fact that Clubhouse basically put a superior product/marketing skin over Ventrilo-style VoIP, put it on mobile, and then stuck a $100M price tag on it, blew my mind.

[^5]: For example, think about how, for virtually all but the largest companies,
     the instructions for setting up a new developer environment
    are almost always flawed or out of date.
    Following a screen recording of the most recent employee to get onboarded
    would be a much more reliable source to draw on.
