---
layout: post
title: Lolita, Fourteen Years Later
date:   2021-03-06
summary: I read Lolita when I was sixteen, and now again at age thirty. Reflections.
published: true
---


*Lolita, light of my life, fire of my loins. My sin, my soul.*
So open these infamous pages. I first read them when I was sixteen.
I was just starting on serious literature: I had read *Gatsby* for the first time,
and was mesmerized.
A friend -- deeper and edgier than I --
recommended *Lolita* next, and off I went with a paperback
from my local library.


Fourteen years later, I am thirty. We are here again because
I know that much of what I had read or seen as a child had gone
far over my head.
I was always too analytical to see the
forest for the trees: I wrote movie reviews about cinematography
but couldn't speak about the plot.
I dissected poems by meter and imagery,
but had no idea what they meant.
Even for *Gatsby*, I appreciated the beautifully crafted prose,
but the human essence of the story had passed me by.
I expected that *Lolita*
too had key parts that I had missed.[^1]


When I was sixteen, I finished the text knowing that I had witnessed
a work of great, haunting beauty. The prose was second to none;
lyrical and evocative in its wordplay, steeped in staggering creativity and
cleverness. On a second read, this holds entirely.
Humbert Humbert's narration remains vivid and engrossing,
sometimes so much so
that you cannot help but feel depraved Humbert tugging at your heartstrings.


As a teen, moral judgment came with caveats.
Obviously Humbert was despicable.
But, ever so eloquent and pathetic, he could capture grains of sympathy.
I grappled with the question posed by Robertson Davies: *is Lolita
about the corruption of an innocent child by a cunning adult, or about the
exploitation of a weak adult by a corrupt child?* As an adult,
this question is easily answered. Humbert is a monster, monster, monster,
through and through. He turns an innocent child into his sex slave.
Moral condemnation could not be more clear-cut.[^2]


Why was it hard for me to pass absolute judgment on Humbert on my first read?
First, as a teenage boy with a reasonably stable home life,
it was hard to truly *understand* the pain
and suffering of sexual abuse.
I understood that it was wrong and worthy of condemnation,
but I was just too young to understand or feel the sheer magnitude of that wrongness.
With no frame of reference,[^5]
it remained abstract and somewhat inaccessible to true empathy.


Second, as a teenager it was difficult to understand the
power imbalance between a child and an adult.
You can't know what it's like to be an adult without having been one.
You figure that adults are bigger, older versions of you, but you don't really know
what that means beyond drinking or voting.
As an adult, you know exactly how
much you've grown and how your sixteen-year-old self was
all kinds of naive and immature.[^3] As an adult reader, Humbert's manipulation, coercion,
and exploitation of a helpless orphan is clear as day, leaving not a shadow of nuance.


Humbert's depravity comes out of his self-absorption: he is boundlessly arrogant,
and does not see the humanity of other characters, least of all Lolita.
This is a *solipsist* novel: told by self-obsessed Humbert,
only his feelings are real, even his "love" for Lolita is not
love for her as a person but an obsession with *an idea of a Lolita* in his mind.
There was a thread of solipsist-existentialist fiction in the early 20th century,
and *Lolita* fits as one of them.


Lolita is also a *surrealist* novel.
Surrealism was the premier force in the arts for decades prior, and
*Lolita* nods to them: it is full of outrageously unlikely coincidences,
and Humbert's vaudevillian descriptions leave an undercurrent of mad distortion
throughout. The final scenes, with Humbert at his most deranged, may well be a
dream sequence. It wouldn't be surprising, since
*Lolita* is full of references to psychoanalysis.
Nabokov was catching the end of the mania Freud and Jung
had kicked off, and it's clear that Nabokov held none of it in high esteem.
The psychoanalytic commentary throughout the novel ranges from dubious to farcical.
It is interesting to see *Lolita* not just as a novel unto itself, but placed
precisely at the end of the solipsist, surrealist, and psychoanalytic movements,
like punctuation.


Finally, *Lolita* is a story about no closure.
Humbert blames his acts on the non-consummation of his childhood relationship. He seeks that
closure in Lolita -- even trying to recreate that exact same moment with her --
but his efforts are futile. Lolita too denied him catharsis;
the relationship ends abruptly, but his hopes remain open. When he finally
kills his rival Quilty,[^8] there is no satisfaction either. Quilty, intoxicated out of his mind,
can't even listen to Humbert's grand monologue of justice,
and won't submit to Humbert's dreams of glorious execution.
From his cell, Humbert hopes that his Lolita will
live on long after him and be commemorated in his work,
but she dies promptly, and his work -- the novel -- does not commemorate *her*.
Given Humbert's dehumanization of Lolita, the novel provides
no view into her life, feeling, hopes, or dreams -- it only commemorates Humbert's depravity.
So crumble even his final hopes at posthumous closure.
Nothing wraps up cleanly in this story; all ends are [left frayed by humans](https://jayriverlong.github.io/2020/11/17/snicket.html),
and fixed only by fate's hand of time.



<br/>

---

[^5]: There are also details in the book, iceberg-style suggestions that
    hint at the horrid *extent* of the abuse that I did not pick up on as a teen.
    The novel has very few scenes that are explicitly sexual, and I think
    you have to be an adult to read into what's implied.

[^1]: On my not-particularly-difficult quest to see all of Kubrick's films,
    I also watched the 1962 film rendition of Lolita when I was nineteen,
    in an airport lounge of all places.
    Beside dim memories of a few scenes, I don't remember the film.

[^2]: And Robertson Davies seems like one hell of a creep with his Humbert-apologist thesis.

[^3]: This is a little like when you were in high school, and one of your *very cool* friends
    was in fact so cool and mature and grown up that they were dating someone in their 20s.
    As an adult, of course, you know that the people in their 20s dating high schoolers
    are walking, talking, red flags.


[^8]: I wasn't sure whether Humbert or Quilty is the greater villain of the story.
    Perhaps that's the point: both are utterly reprehensible, and such monsters are
    not unique but rather crawling in the woodwork everywhere. Lolita finally tells us that
    she would rather go back to live with Quilty, a child pornographer who broke her heart, than Humbert.
    This tells us all we need to know to hammer the final nail of judgment into Humbert's coffin.


<!-- commenting this out in case i ever want to recycle it... think the first paragraph
i've already basically included, and the second paragraph isn't really worth diving in on

[^9]: Actually, there were two more observations that didn't merit inclusion in the body proper,
    so forgive me as I shamelessly stick them into this footnote:


    The first is that Humbert is an *everyday asshole*. He's already a rapist monster, of course,
    but he also has no redeeming interactions with others.
    In fact, he is boundlessly arrogant, self-absorbed, judgmental, and hateful toward others.
    He does not see the humanity of anyone but himself,
    certainly not of any women (with possible exception of Lolita at the very end).
    Other characters, even his own wives, appear surrounded by insults.
    To him, they are brainless, porcine, sallow, phocine,[^4] stale-fleshed, hideous, babbling, absurd,
    scampering, scurrying, swines, Boschian cripples, and so on. As a teenager, you may have some appetite
    for edgy cynicism and snarky insults. As an adult, you've seen enough pitiful, hateful men
    to spot Humbert chief among their ranks.


    The second is that Humbert is a *loser*.
    He presents himself as an academic,
    an erudite scholar, and fools many characters with his professorial air.
    To an adult, it is clear that Humbert as a lazy dilettante.
    He is a trust-fund layabout, his work is forever unfinished,
    and what he shows of it is laughably bad.
    The novel contains one or two of his terrible poems,
    and his one publication that he names -- "The Proustian theme in a letter from Keats to Benjamin Bailey"
    -- is, if you know who these people are, utterly ridiculous by its title alone.
    The combination of everyone's-an-idiot-but-me condescension,
    farcically pretentious "scholarly work" and self-importance reminded me of Ignatius J. Reilly
    from *A Confederacy of Dunces*. I found myself reading
    Humbert's preposterous, stilted self-aggrandizements, and thought they could've come
    straight off the page of *Dunces*.

[^4]: Seal-like, which admittedly is a hysterical way to describe a fellow beachgoer.
-->
