---
layout: post
title: "Frontier Growth Required for Peace: the Moral Imperative of Going to Space / TODO: better title needed"
date:   2021-01-01
summary: foo
published: false
---



As I spent this quarantine year reading economic history and playing diplomacy-style
board games, one thing became clear: it's easy to cooperate only so long as the endgame is not in sight.
In our practical world,
peace is only possible while there is a prospect of **limitless** growth.
There is now only one frontier that provides that prospect: outer space.
Going to space is therefore necessary for there to be peace in the coming years.


We build this thesis from the bottom up.
Every agent (person or organization) acts rationally to maximize their value/power,
i.e. their slice of the pie.
There are two different conditions under
which these agents may act: namely, whether there are foreseeable limits to growth, or not.


With no limits to growth, the conventional play is to cooperate:
you will be better off with a smaller slice
of a greater pie. You might not be better off than your neighbour, but your overall quality of life will improve.
Actors don't need to quibble with one another over their slices, because theyre all betting on the
overall pie to grow such that their share becomes relatively much larger than if they were playing zero-sum games.


However, if there are limits to growth looming on the horizon, actors rapidly come to understand
they're in a game of musical chairs. They can see how large their slice can reasonably become,
and very quickly the most efficient way for them to maximize their slice of the pie is no longer
to contribute to a growing pie, but to take from other actors' slices.
The cooperative game thus turns into a game of cannibalism.


(TODO: smooth out the NPV thing here, it's a logical jump)

Another way to view it is that peace is basically the outcome of a net present value (NPV)
calculation. If there are no foreseeable limits to growth, then the NPV over an unbounded time horizon
 is effectively infinite, whereby the dominant strategy is cooperation, to maximize the probability
of moving into that infinite-value future. If, on the other hand, there are foreseen limits to growth,
then the NPV is suddenly finite, and at every step in time, you will calculate whether you will gain more
from cooperating or fighting. Eventually the scales tip.


In practice, that is what I think we've seen in the West over the past ten years.
With the rise of China, the West's slice of the pie has decreased dramatically, and it is clear that it will
diminish further. At the same time, there's a clear state of confusion around the possibilities of future growth:
Europe has had extremely little meaningful technological or enterprise growth to speak of in the past twenty years.
If not for the presence of American firms, they might as well still be in the late 1990s.
Disoriented and grasping at straws, they're busily regulating anything that moves in attempt to capture some value.
The US has remained the leading innovator in software (the world of bits), but as Thiel has put it,
is lagging behind in the world of atoms. No surprise there, that's what happens when you outsource your manufacturing.
As Dan Wang [writes](https://danwang.co/2020-letter/),
our "biggest innovations" now are firms like Facebook that generate extremely little meaingful
intellectual property, while printing money by exploiting network effects. They innovate much more in business models
than in technology. Many writers and thinkers, Thiel chief among them, have diagnosed a hazy, complacent malaise: we seem to be stuck
in the [eternal 90s](https://twitter.com/jayriverlong/status/1327132002664001538?s=20),
with no great challenges for us to unify behind. In other words, not just are there clear limits to growth,
we have little idea what the future growth opportunities even are.


The conclusions are clear. As a global society, we opportunities for unbounded growth, otherwise we're going to
cannibalize ourselves as we fight over the finite resources on planet earth. As a country (in the US),
we have to create more opportunities for growth, otherwise we'll divide ourselves and quarrel while the country crumbles.
The early signs of this are already there: deep inequalities (urban/rural, wealth, income) are dividing the country
along numerous axes, and the individual battles (left/right, socialist/capitalist, etc.) are only becoming more severe.


There is only one way out: growth. In recent years, and in particular in 2020, technological optimism and bold dreams
[appear to be returning](/2020/11/26/optimism.html). Elon Musk deserves great credit here, for reminding a generation
of technologists that it is possible, as one man, to achieve what nation-states could not, to accelerate electric vehicle
progress by a solid decade, and to set our sights on the stars again.


It's the last point here that is particularly meaningful. On earth, there are only so many "great challenges" for us to
sink our teeth into. Nuclear fusion? Too abstract, most people don't get it. Cure cancer? It's surprisingly marginal -- it
would extend the average life only by three years, a 4% lifespan boost to everyone. Explore the bottoms of the oceans?
Sure, and then what. None of these shift the earlier NPV calculation from the finite back into the infinite.

The thing that can really capture the hearts and minds of people around the globe is outer space. It is the final frontier,
and it opens up endless possibilities of future growth. The NPV calculation becomes infinite for everyone once more.
For that reason, going to space is not just inspirational and appealing in its own right, but a moral imperative:
we *have to* open up this frontier of growth, otherwise we are confining ourselves to zero-sum games on planet earth,
which are sure to end in rapid self-destruction.
