---
layout: post
title: "Advice? Just Say No"
date:   2021-02-27
summary: "There comes a point in your career where advice is no longer useful. It happens sooner than you think."
published: true
---


Advice is dangerous.
Like a horoscope, advice
often sounds well-crafted and relevant,
but believing it is rarely productive.
With clever turns of phrase and time-honored proverbs, you can
turn any position into an elegant, self-evident truth.
"One bird in the hand is better than two in the bush" say some, and others
respond "never compromise, doubling down is the only way to succeed".
"The customer is always right" but also "sometimes you gotta fire your customer."
Warren Buffett is quoted religiously for his investment advice,
and a big reason for that is that he has given so much advice
in his career that you can quote him to argue one way, and quote him for the
counter-argument too. What is one to believe?


Programmers learn this early on in their careers. On a late night debugging
an issue, they'll Google the error message to find... [no results](https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/wisdom_of_the_ancients.png).
Every other issue could be solved by copy-pasting from StackOverflow,
but not this one. A sinking feeling sets in. *You're on your own now*.
No advice will help you now, you have to figure it out yourself.


In other, less mechanical domains, such moments are rare.
There's always relevant-seeming advice.
Career advice is full of idiosyncratic and contradictory positions,
and business advice legendarily so.
The contradictory diversity is because when people give advice, it tends to directly
reflect their own experiences,[^1] and most people's experiences
are quite different from one another. Businesses can be startlingly unique
in the details, so it's no surprise that one person will tell you
to focus on scalability, and another will tell you to do things that don't scale.


Because advice is usually a generalization of "this worked for me", it's important
to see that advice is usually *reasoning by analogy*, which is dangerous.
"If we say that
your situation is like mine fifteen years ago, then you should do this..."
is the silent preamble that should caveat most advice.
It breaks the same way that reasoning by analogy does:
surprise surprise, your situations are not
actually analogous. They're different in the details, and the details matter.
Most advice is not good or bad, but *inapplicable*.


But surely there exists useful advice? Yes, there exist *playbooks*. At scale,
collectives of people have figured out roughly how to optimize a process. There's a playbook
for getting into a good college. There's a playbook for interviewing at Amazon,
starting a B2B SaaS company, or [becoming a Chess Grandmaster](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%A1szl%C3%B3_Polg%C3%A1r).
These playbooks are syntheses of successful approaches, like people
figuring out together how to speed-run a video game.
However, in the real world, the territory is always changing.
These playbooks, even good ones like YC's
Startup School, have expiration dates.


What are you to do if there's no playbook? Well, you're on your own.
Silicon Valley types would say "think from first principles",
which is generally
your best bet, but it can be hard to get the premises right.
More importantly,
it's time to trust yourself.
If you are in an area with no playbooks,
you have graduated to the frontier.
You are there because you are good at what you do.
If you are good at what you do, then why not double down on your own
intuition?
*Do what you think is best* is usually good advice to those
who have already shown exceptional capabilities.


The irony that this is an advice post does not escape me. Of course it follows my own
experience: in my younger days I spent much time seeking mentorship and advice.
The advice I received was generally not very good.
I remember running my first prospective
angel investment past a number of venture capitalists I respected.
They all passed, citing various qualms.
The investment seemed like a no-brainer to me,
but given the bearishness of these experts,
I passed, thinking "surely there's something I'm not getting here". In the end, all the investors
were wrong, my intuition was right, their advice was just noise and I missed a phenomenal deal.
From there on I stopped listening to what others said, and strictly followed my own judgement:
if I'm here, I got here because I'm good at what I do, and so I'll just trust myself.


Life is full of noise. Advice is a combination of people's genuine opinions and their
performative signalling, repeating the tenets of their in-group.[^2]
This form of noise is omnipresent, and it'll pull you in all directions.
You could spend all day listening to two business gurus give perfectly contradictory advice; it
all nets out to zero. For the most part, just listening to it will [muddy your thinking](https://twitter.com/jayriverlong/status/1346370366336163844?s=20)
and lead you through all sorts of mental contortions to conform to the intellectual aesthetics of others,
instead of carving the way you believe to be true.
There's a way to cut through the noise: ignore it, trust yourself, research carefully, reason rigorously.



<br/>

---

[^1]: This is excepting an even more dangerous form of advice, the purely theoretical
    advice given by someone who has zero practical experience with the subject matter.

[^2]: Extremely common in business contexts. "Naval says...", "Charlie Munger says...",
    and so on. These are signalling fortune cookies rarely worth paying attention to.
